Hi guys, and welcome back.
In this video, we're going to learn more about for loops,
by creating a mathematical programme that finds prime numbers.
Let's start off by finding the prime numbers
under the number 10, so we will do
for n in range two to 10.
And that means that we're going to get a new variable n,
and it's going to be equal to two the first time
that the loop runs, then it will be three
the second time it runs, and then four
and so on, up until nine.
We're gonna start at two,
because it is the first prime number.
Now, how do you check whether a number is prime or not?
What you'll want to do, is you wanna see
whether n is divisible by any number other than itself.
So, how do we do that?
Well if n is two, we know that it's a prime number
because two is only divisible by one and two.
If n is three, or what we could do is we could check
whether n is divisible by two, and if it's not
then we know it's a prime number.
So why is that?
Well, imagine the number three.
There are only two numbers underneath it, one and two,
and we know that a prime number can only be divisible
by one or itself in order to be prime,
so the only number we have to check is two.
If three is not divisible by two,
we know it's a prime number.
Let's move on to four.
For the number four, we only have to check
numbers two and three.
If four is divisible by two,
then we know that it's not prime,
so for every number under the number
we wanna check, we need to see
whether it's divisible or not.
So what we're gonna do is we're
going to create another for loop,
that actually goes from two up to the number n.
Remember, imagine we wanted to check
whether four is prime, then we would check two and three.
If we wanted to check eight, then we would check
two three four five six and seven.
And what we do inside this inner loop
is we say if n modulus x is zero,
that means n divided by x gives you a remainder of zero,
then we can print something like n equals x
multiplied by n divide divide x.
And then we'll break.
What this is doing is, imagine we are iteration number four,
we will then start at two, and we will say
if four divided by two gives you a remainder of zero,
then print four equals two times two.
And then we will break.
Notice that the break keyword is inside two for loops.
The break keyword and the continue keyword only affect
the closest for loop to them, so only this loop would break.
This loop here would not break.
So what does this mean?
Well, as soon as we find that n is divisible by x,
that means that we know that n is not a prime number.
So, we don't have to check anymore numbers.
All we have to do is print that it equals something
that can be divided, so it's not a prime number.
However, imagine we've got iteration number five.
Well, we'll start with x is two,
and the remainder will not be zero,
so we will not run this code.
Then, five divided by three will also not give you
a remainder of zero, so we will also not run this code.
Finally, five divided by four will also
not cause to run this code.
So, when the number is prime,
this loop here will never break.
Therefore, we can put an else keyword in this loop.
Which means, if this loop runs to completion
without encountering any breaks, n is prime.
Let's run this, and you'll see the output.
It's quite magical, you get two is a prime number,
three is a prime number, four equals two times two.
Something interesting about this is you can see that
as soon as we encounter one thing that it is divisible by,
then we break and we don't have to check
whether nine is divisible by four,
and then whether nine is divisible by five and by six
and by seven, as soon as we encounter that nine
is divisible by three, we just stop, and that's it.
So this here is actually quite a convoluted piece of code
because you've got a nested for loop.
And you're also making use of this else keyword,
that again, most people don't know about.
But hopefully it makes sense,
if you have any questions, please do ask
in the course Q and A.
As a small optimization, in case that you get asked
in an interview or something like that,
you don't have to check this loop from two to n.
You actually mathematically only have to check
from two to the square root of n.
That's just how finding prime numbers works,
they're using Erastothenes' sieve,
but again, it's not really important for this code.
Thank you for joining me in this video,
I hope you've learned something,
and I'll see you in the next one.